Add bookmarking documentation article (#331)
posit-dev/py-shiny-site: docs/bookmarking-advanced.qmd

---
title: Advanced Bookmarking
code-annotations: hover
---

## Introduction

While basic bookmarking automatically captures input values and updates URLs, many applications need more sophisticated state management. This guide covers advanced bookmarking techniques for complex scenarios.

::: {.callout-note}
Before reading this guide, make sure you're familiar with the concepts in [Bookmarking State](bookmarking.qmd), including automatic bookmarking, bookmark buttons, and excluding inputs.
:::

> **What you'll learn:**

Reviewer: Love putting this up front like this

- **Custom state** - Save reactive values and computed state that aren't tied to inputs
- **Lifecycle callbacks** - Hook into the bookmarking process at different stages
- **Input updates** - Programmatically update inputs during restoration
- **Server-side storage** - Configure persistent storage for large or sensitive data

These techniques are essential for applications with:

- Complex derived state or calculations that need preservation
- Large state that exceeds URL length limits
- Sensitive data that shouldn't appear in URLs
- File uploads or other data that can't be encoded in URLs

## Saving Custom Values

> Sometimes you need to save state that isn't directly tied to an input. For example, a calculated value, accumulated state, or reactive value. Use the `on_bookmark` callback to save custom values into the `state.values` dictionary. This dictionary is serialized after bookmarking and provided during bookmark restoration.

Reviewer: Also provided to what? To the server? To the user? Both?

```{.python}
from shiny.express import session
from shiny import reactive

total = reactive.value(0)

# Save `total` in custom values
@session.bookmark.on_bookmark
async def _(state):
    state.values["total"] = total()

# Restore `total` (when possible)
@session.bookmark.on_restore
def _(state):
    if "total" in state.values:
        total.set(state.values["total"])

# Other code to alter the value of `total`...
```

In this example:

1. The `total` reactive value isn't tied to an input
2. We use `@session.bookmark.on_bookmark` to save it to `state.values`
3. We use `@session.bookmark.on_restore` to restore it when the app loads

## Updating Inputs During Restoration

Sometimes you need to update one input based on a bookmarked value. Use the `on_restore` callback:

```{.python}
from shiny.express import input, session, ui
from shiny import reactive

> # Exclude this input from automatic bookmarking

Reviewer: I wonder if we should provide this as an example in the previous article, I don't think I saw an exemption in context in there.

session.bookmark.exclude.append("computed_choice")

computed_value = reactive.value()

@reactive.effect
@reactive.event(input.base_choice)
def _():
    # Compute derived value
    computed_value.set(input.base_choice().lower())

@session.bookmark.on_bookmark
async def _(state):
    # Save the computed value
    state.values["computed"] = computed_value()

@session.bookmark.on_restore
def _(state):
    # Restore and update the UI
    if "computed" in state.values:
        uppercase = state.values["computed"].upper()
        ui.update_radio_buttons("computed_choice", selected=uppercase)
```

## Bookmark Lifecycle Callbacks

Shiny provides four callbacks for customizing the bookmark process:

**During Bookmarking:**

- `@session.bookmark.on_bookmark` - Called **before** saving state. Use this to add custom values to `state.values`.

> - `@session.bookmark.on_bookmarked` - Called **after** saving state. Use this to handle the bookmark URL (e.g., update the browser's address bar).

Reviewer: This is also when the server-side store would be updated in the server case, right? Should we specify that to keep the URL vs. server-side case clean?

## Limitations

- **Automatic bookmarking of inputs only**: Only `input` values are automatically bookmarked. You must manually save and restore reactive values and other computed state using `on_bookmark` and `on_restore` callbacks.

- **Serialization constraints**: Custom values in `state.values` must be JSON-serializable. Complex objects like file handles, database connections, or custom classes need special handling or cannot be bookmarked.

- **Lifecycle timing**: The `on_restore` callback runs early in the session initialization. Be careful with operations that depend on the full app being initialized - use `on_restored` for those cases.

- **Server storage persistence**: Server-side bookmarks require persistent storage. Ensure your hosting environment supports file persistence across deployments and restarts.

## Complete Example

Bookmarking features demonstrated in this example:

- Automatic URL updates as inputs change
- Bookmarking tab state (via `id="tabs"`)
- Excluding action buttons from bookmarks
- Saving and restoring custom values (reset count)
- Multiple input types and outputs

> ::: {.column-page}

Reviewer: Is there any way we can add like, a URL display here? People may be confused because their URL (the docs) isn't changing, so it could be nice to have that shown somehow within the app.

@reactive.effect
@reactive.event(input.reset)
def _():
    ui.update_slider("n", value=100)
    ui.update_select("dist", selected="Normal")
    ui.update_checkbox("show_mean", value=True)
    reset_count.set(reset_count() + 1)

# Bookmark when inputs change
@reactive.effect
@reactive.event(input.n, input.dist, input.show_mean, ignore_init=True)
async def _():
    await session.bookmark()

# Save custom state
@session.bookmark.on_bookmark
async def _(state):
    state.values["reset_count"] = reset_count()

# Restore custom state
@session.bookmark.on_restore
def _(state):
    if "reset_count" in state.values:
        reset_count.set(state.values["reset_count"])

# Update URL bar
@session.bookmark.on_bookmarked
async def _(url: str):
    await session.bookmark.update_query_string(url)
```
:::

## Server-Side Bookmarking

For production applications with larger state or sensitive data, use server-side bookmarking.

::: {.callout-note}

## Professional products

Shiny for Python's server-side bookmarking is already integrated into Posit's professional products. No need to configure anything if you are using Posit Connect or Posit Workbench.

:::

> To control where bookmarks are stored, you need to configure the storage location by setting global functions for saving and restoring bookmark directories. Here's an example using the `pathlib` module to create a directory for bookmarks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To control where bookmark data is stored, you need to configure the storage location by setting global functions for saving and restoring bookmark directories. Here's an example using the `pathlib` module to create a directory for bookmarks:
```
Is there a default location in Connect or Workbench we should flag here?
(Also before you come at me about "data is" https://www.merriam-webster.com/grammar/some-data-about-datum" 😆 )

```{.python}
from pathlib import Path
from shiny.bookmark import set_global_save_dir_fn, set_global_restore_dir_fn

# Define where bookmarks are stored
bookmark_dir = Path(__file__).parent / "bookmarks"
bookmark_dir.mkdir(exist_ok=True)

def save_bookmark_dir(id: str) -> Path:
    """Create and return the directory for saving a bookmark."""
    save_dir = bookmark_dir / id
    save_dir.mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
    return save_dir

def restore_bookmark_dir(id: str) -> Path:
    """Return the directory for restoring a bookmark."""
    return bookmark_dir / id

# Set global defaults
set_global_save_dir_fn(save_bookmark_dir)
set_global_restore_dir_fn(restore_bookmark_dir)

# ... define app_ui and server ...
```

::: {.callout-warning}
Server bookmarking is designed for hosting environments. In production, ensure you have:

- Persistent storage that survives app restarts
- Appropriate cleanup policies for old bookmarks
- Sufficient disk space for bookmark storage
:::

::: {.callout-important}

> [Shinyapps.io](https://www.shinyapps.io/) and [Posit Cloud Connect](https://connect.posit.cloud/), by design, do not support server-side bookmarking as Apps are deployed within a temporary virtual environment. Any files that are saved will be lost when the virtual environment is shut down.

Reviewer: This was a little confusing to me given what we just said about Connect. Should we specify up top or down here about Connect vs Connect Cloud? I feel like that could confuse people.
